Well, good afternoon and welcome to the Social (door shuts) Housing and Communities
Select Committee. Um, thank you for being here this afternoon.
So, what I might just do is get you to introduce yourselves, um, and
then make some opening comments. And then, from there, we'll move to questions from
members.
Great. Um,
thank you. Um, good afternoon. Um, thanks for the opportunity to talk about our
important work. Um, just introducing colleagues, so to my right, we've got
Jess Smith, uh, DC in Maori housing area, Jessica Garland,
uh, GM in our delivery area. And then, uh, some of
the... well, a lot of the team from HUD behind me.
I won't go into names. Um, look, just in terms of
opening comments, the challenges we face around, um, housing supply affordability
and access have developed across, uh, many decades and
require a concerted and aligned effort to resolve.
So we'll all be aware, New Zealand does... has not built enough houses.
Uh, people in lower incomes have fewer housing choices.
And the funding system for housing and urban development has been,
complicated, confusing, and investment hasn't always been focused on
value for money.
Uh, HUD manages over 8.4 billion in funding per
year. Uh, over the past year, we've focused on
four key areas, uh, to help improve housing outcomes for New
Zealanders. First being enabling efficient land markets, and
that's really the Going For Housing growth program, um, and obviously working
very closely with MfE and other agencies on that.
Delivering other housing s- be- better housing support to those who need
it. Um, and the most recent example of that is the
investment plan that was launched two weeks ago.
Uh, thirdly, addressing residual barriers to urban development.
Big focus, uh, there on, um, helping where we can around
city and regional deals. There's obviously three in the co- under in discussion at
the moment. Um, and also, uh, for example, the City Rail Link in
Auckland. Uh, and the fourth is protecting rights and obligations through efficient
regulations. Um, and case t- uh, two
recent cases in point there are obviously, uh, the work around, um, Retirement
Villages Act, uh, which I believe announcements are due
soon, um, and property managers as well.
And obviously, we had j- on Monday, the, uh, PET Bonds picnic,
um, which was a really good, uh, success as well and will make a difference along
the lives of renters. Um,
that is it from me, so happy to answer questions.
All right. Thank you. First question from Kieran.
Thank you. Thanks very much for coming in.
Um,
I understand that the latest homelessness
insights briefing is due this month.
Has a draft been provided to the Minister?
So, uh, yep. Uh, the, the draft has been provided to
Minister. Yep.
And so, conscious that, uh, we will
need to wait till
that comes out,
uh, but in your ongoing conversations with frontline providers, have they indicated
a, an additional increase in homelessness from what they can
see?
So we're in regular d- uh, discussions with frontline providers and
councils and other, and other parties.
Um, the report, when it's, uh,
released, and that is, I think as Minister Bishop said, will be released shortly.
Um, that will have some further insights, um,
uh, in that report. Um, I don't wanna get ahead
of exactly what's in the report because, um, it is with
ministers. They have, uh, only got it recently and I think it's fair,
uh, that they have time to review it.
What I can say is that, um, as ministers
previously said, um,
we recognize that the challenges around homelessness and wanting to
make an impact and wanting to make a dent in that, um,
issue. Um, and so we are very focused at the moment,
for example, on making real headway around our September
announcements, which is getting those Housing First places,
um, uh, settled, uh, with
providers and tenants, um, and also working on some of the other initiatives
that we've got in place. For example, improving the utilization of transitional
housing so more homeless people can get into, uh, transitional housing
quicker as well.
So you are, uh, have ongoing,
uh, engagement with frontline providers, not solely for the
purpose of compiling that report.
Um, you've previously indicated in, um,
uh, appearings, appearances before this committee that,
uh, given
the census is the, the most robust, I think
is the term you used-
Mm-hmm.
... for measuring levels of homelessness, you're reliant on feedback from frontline
providers in between those times.
So in that engagement with frontline providers, have they indicated
another increase in homelessness?
So I, as I said just before, I'll let the, um, when the insights report come
out, comes out, it will provide, um, more information.
And there's a range of sources of information from, um, lists
and counts from homeless providers, uh, to, um,
councils and also reports from public.
Um,
what I can say is, is obviously there are, you know, uh, reports
from some providers, like take, um, Auckland City Mission, um,
around the number of homeless in Auckland.
Uh, we are aware of that. Um, but I am very much,
and the team at HUD, working very closely with MSD and the providers, are very
much focused on getting on with what we said in September, which was
getting those Housing First places tenanted, getting the other
services, support services, uh, underway.
And we've made really good s- uh, headway there.
And also very much focused on getting TH utilization, uh,
improved and very much focused on getting social housing into those areas
where it is, uh, most needed as well.
Okay. Well, um, I didn't
ask the content of the report. I asked about your ongoing engagement with frontline
providers, but I don't think I'm gonna get any further with that.
So I'll ask specifically...... um, around the
300 additional Housing First places that were announced in August.
How many people are now in a placement as a result of that
announcement?
So,
the latest figures I have, so of the
300, uh, which was one part of the announcement,
uh, we have in, uh-
(coughs)
Yeah, 90 places at least, and 44 households
have been housed to date.
So 44 out of the 300?
That's right.
Okay. Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, supplementary, Tamatha.
Um, just, uh, ̌kau tāpāi. Just on the, um, questions around census
and data.
Mm-hmm.
Um, could you talk to us a little bit about, uh, how you're
seeing, uh, the experience of women in terms of
growing homelessness and rough sleeping, and what trends you're
seeing when it comes to women
experiencing homelessness or rough sleeping?
So, so whai-
so we acknowledge that, um,
there's, there are a number of, of, of women in, in rough sleeping situations.
We also acknowledge the number of, um, its disproportionate impact,
um, on Maori as well. Um, I don't have
the breakdown with me, uh, specifically around,
uh, uh, women, but what I can say is just as I said to
the member before, um,
we... Well, if I take our initiatives that we had, we talked about
when we launched in September.
Um, um,
we, uh, the ministers agreed
to our advice, which was to provide for 300 additional places
because we knew that from talking to, um, Housing First
providers that there was at least, um, 700
across Auckland, Hamilton, Wellington, and Christchurch of their
clients that weren't housed. So they're providing support service to them, but
they couldn't provide a house. We also knew that from discussions with
them, there was roughly around 400, 423 of that s-
700 that were actually rough
sleeping. From that, we know there will be a,
a, a, a make-up of, um, disproportionate number of Maori, there'll be single men in
there. There will also be, also be, uh, women as well.
Um,
we have also, what we also did then was made sure that
actually, we would fund 300
new places and we would also work with the providers who are
increasing capacity for another 100 and so places that would meant
we could tackle that 423 places that we were told by home- Housing First
providers in those four areas. By tackling those th-
that- by providing for that, um, supply, I have no doubt
that we'll make a dent in terms of, um, the number of women who are on the street
living rough.
And, um, just as, can I ask a quick sub on that?
Um, just in terms of those Housing First places, how are
you generally finding the provision of Housing First in Auckland compared to
Wellington?
Um, so I think in
all... So at the moment, we're making a bit more headway, I'd
say, in Auckland.
Mm-hmm.
However, I, uh, I don't think that's an issue with any
provider, um, and I don't think it's an issue, uh,
uh... I mean, 'cause at the end of the day, the Housing First providers are
working with CHPs. So if I take the Wellington example, Ds- uh, DCM
is working with, um-
Dwell.
... Dwell, yep. Um, and I know that they've made a good
headway and they've got opportunities in the pipeline.
We hope to see that's come to fruition pretty quickly.
Um, in Auckland, there's an, a wider num- uh, range of providers-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, from, um, Te Kahu, uh, to, um,
Lifewise, to-
Vision West.
... Vision West. Um, and so there's a bit more headway being made in, in Auckland.
But both markets, um, or both areas, you know,
we- they are going to the private
market and asking for landlords to provide their
properties. And that is always something that, you
know, is a, is a challenge. These are clients who have complex
needs, um, and not all landlords, you know, would want to
obviously, um, necessarily s- uh, work with the Housing First
providers. Uh, my view, s-
prejudice on this, is I'd encourage any private
landlord, if they're approached by a Housing First provider, to really
consider, um, working with, uh, the CHP and working with the
Housing First provider, 'cause this is a really,
um, important matter, and we wanna get these people into more stable and
secure housing.
Supplementary, Hillian Taylor.
Okay. So-
Mm-hmm. ... I've tried to ask this question of K.O.
a few times, and they've told me you are the people, right?
And it fits with this issue over women,
because I went to the Women's Shelters Conference, and
there was a whole lot of data from, um, Canada about,
um, women not being... They, they're basically turned away by the
refuges if there are domestic violence situations.
Um, 70% of women without
children are turned away and they never come back because they go
back into those situations, or they go on the street.
So we have also women not
being able to buy houses, um, who are single and
older, so we have a whole kind of precariousness about w-
women. My question is this. How much of this
information, that kind of prediction of where that's, that
need is, are you gathering, and do you see yourselves
as the lead that's gonna tell K.O.
what to build, where to build it-
Y- yeah.
... for groups like this, cohorts like this?
How aware of it are you, and how predictive
is it?
Okay, so, uh,
that is-So, I would
say
in the past, we haven't, uh, been
as, uh, that's hard, um, and also,
um, other parties we've worked with have not used the data that has been
available. Um, and I don't think we've understood clearly enough the
cohorts that we, uh, tried to help.
Um, we are very much focused, and this is the GPS hub, on helping those
in h- in, in high housing need, and I don't think, as I said, we've had
the right data and the right, um, uh,
setup to be able to actually respond.
Um, now, what I would say on that is, um...
I'll let you talk about the, the Māori stuff soon, um, which is important,
um,
is that within HUD, we've done a number of things over the last cou- couple of
years and more recently. So, one is we've really upped our data,
our data area, um, to be a lot clearer
on, um, what impact we're having, which cohorts, uh, we are supporting
and, and what the impacts might be.
Now that mat- that, that work over the last two years has
enabled us to actually support the Minister in the release of his
investment plan last year, and that's critical in terms of helping
KO know where to build in the future, once they're able to
build net new again. Equally, where they should be renewing their
stock. So, you know, we want... KO's going to have to renew
amount- a large amount of stock over the future years.
We want to be clear on where, which is the best place for that stock to be renewed.
Do you just renew 500 in Auckland, um, and put 500 back
there? Or do you renew 400 in Auckland and put 50 somewhere else and
20 somewhere else and make up the difference?
So,
getting to the how do we do that, that's why we've got the investment
plan that was released and the Minister sort of addre- talked about that at a high
level, and I'm really happy if you want me to go into more detail about how we've
worked through that investment plan, the kind of data and how that will guide our
investments in the future. I should say the investment plan at the moment is g-
is focused on
how we, uh, use the flexible fund that was announced in Budget
'25. The investment plan should not be seen as
just a point in time for the flexible fund.
If there are future funds in the few- uh, uh, uh, you know, in future years
and there are few- different needs based on the government of the day, this
investment plan now provides us an ability to be quite focused
on w- what we want to invest in, where we want to invest.
And as the Minister said, you know, right homes,
the right place for the right people. Do you want me to talk about...
is it useful if I go into the investment plan? Okay.
Well, so I might get... Do you want to come up?
Adam?
Yeah.
While Adam's coming up, uh, one of the other things I wanted to add is we've made a
shift in the organization to work in a place-based way.
So we're able to focus in on communities and understand what the communities need
in each of those particular places, which will help inform some of the work that
we're doing around the investment plan.
Before you answer it, can I just give you another context which I'm really
interested in?
Mm-hmm.
I'm, I'm the MP for Mount Albert. It's getting a whole lot of
intensification and it's got a population that's aging.
So I'm very interested in aspects of this plan that
might enlighten me as to how those two things go together when
we're creating new zoning plans and we're going to have affordable
housing. It must be really hard to predict what you're going to
need. But how are you going about taking that place into
account?
Yeah.
And also, you've got an aging population that are no
longer able to afford a house, so they're, they're going
to retire without a house.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So I'll, I'll have...
I'll answer it while everyone... and you can...
you'll come in with probably a bit more detail.
So, so, um,
first of all, so, so key part of the...
a key part of the investment plan is about saying, okay, right, if the objective is
high, high housing need, l- where are the highest...
where, where are the places in New Zealand with the highest housing need, right?
So we've... and, and how do you distribute the flexible fund, which is basically
social housing and affordable rental?
So, we start with... there's a bit of a
process we go through. We start with looking at, um, the housing
register. We start looking... and we also look at severe housing deprivation, which
is coming off the census. That takes you so far and it
gives you different results because as the Minister said, far north, you can look
at the housing register and go, "Hmm, doesn't look too much of an issue." Severe
housing deprivation and you go, "Oh my God, we have a big...
we have a bigger issue here than we'd realized." So that's the first point, of
course. What we also then do is we go, okay, what's happening in that
market? What's the market growth expected? What's the housing growth?
What's going to be the demand? What's already happening in the market around
pricing and other factors? Um, we also, uh, talk
and check, check, okay, what do we know around the data and the cohorts and who
might need social housing or affordable rental in that, in that area?
We then have also checked that with the communities.
We're spending quite a bit of time going out because the data tells you something,
so- so it gives you a start and might be the answer, but it's not always the, the
complete picture.
Mm-hmm.
Then what we have done, um, is go,
okay, what is the level of growth that housing that is
already expected over future years and, and you know, forecasting
what... again, it's population growth and other demands and how much will
that we think address, you know, what's on the housing register
and severe housing deprivation? Will it address it enough where we go, yep,
not acknowled- not discounting there might be a need, but we...
may be better to invest in some other place in New Zealand still within the money
we have available?
What we then do is, um, go, okay, we also then the last check
is how much actual government housing has already been
invested in that area? So if you, you look at the investment plan,
uh, that's been released, you'll notice that Rotorua isn't on the
list. Now that's not because Rotorua is in a high housing need and in fact
Rotorua there's, coming off the sub, there's over 500 social
homes and m- and affordable rentals to be built.But we looked at
Rotorua and we said, based on the stats, based on the level of government
investment, actually we can invest our money
somewhere else in a higher need place.
And that was because of the amount, ultimately because of the amount of government
investment that was already planned to go in there over the next two years.
So, that's, that's the process we went through.
Um, do you want to say anything else to that?
I think you've given quite a, quite a full answer there Brad.
What I would say is, um, a- as Brad
said, the investment plan is around government's investment in
social and affordable housing from a,
what is government going to subsidize, uh, for people, on the
housing register or in similar positions.
I think one of the responses to your question, too, is we need to actually look at
the market as a whole and so this is part of the government's going for housing
growth program, which is actually understanding in different areas,
actually what is, what are the number of houses that are going to be needed in
those areas over time, and setting targets, uh, to be able to get councils
to do that. So, so I think there's both a piece here which is about government
investment-
Yeah.
... but there's also a piece here about actually what's that regulatory environment
that the government's establishing to ensure that housing supply continues
to flow regardless of the, the government investment side of it as being only one
part.
Can I ask a quick question on that? Just, um, what are some examples of some
incentives that you think might work for local government to get
building and doing their part?
I think, um, so look, I think one of the biggest,
uh, changes is, is what the minister has talked about for going for housing
pr- uh, plans, so um,
to go for housing growth program which is two things.
One,
how do you get actually
land supply, more land supply so it can be developed and how do you have, how
do you get that quicker and on scale?
And the second is, how do you make sure that you get a, a development or a funding
and financing model for infrastructure that is more enabling?
So, um, if I take the councils and discussion, uh, and
discussions I have with a number of councils, uh, common,
uh, and, and also with developers and other parties including community housing
providers, um, who are building in place in KO is-
Sorry.
... restrictive planning rules are killing us.
We cannot get enough land, uh,
available. Um, second is, uh,
infrastructure funding and financing is slow because,
um, there's not clear about who's paying for it.
Um, and a lot of the time under the current regime with development contributions,
the actual cost goes back on the rate payer rather than necessarily the
beneficiary.
Mm.
Thank you, Ciaran. Thank you. Um,
earlier today Minister Poor Tucker indicated that in his
view, um, some regions have seen an increase
in homelessness and some regions have seen a decrease in homelessness.
Presumably, that view is based on advice that you've passed on.
Can you inform the committee of the areas that have seen
a drop in homelessness?
Um, so
minister is right. Uh,
but I think this is, uh,
a... Some areas will always only expect we'll always see a, a, an increase
and some will stay stable and some will drop.
Um, as I said, um, before, I'm not gonna get ahead
of the release of the insights report.
Um, what I am-
With respect, I haven't asked you to do that.
I'm not, I'm not asking what's in the report and in fairness the report doesn't
cover these areas in great detail.
The frontline providers or councils you give maybe three or four.
There are-
Mm.
... many more than that. And, um, and I'm not asking you to
divulge what information you've provided in the report.
Okay.
But when... And, and with respect, when a minister makes a claim
like that based on advice that you've provided, that is a legitimate question that
deserves a response.
Okay.
So, um,
I think, uh, so from I think the best way to respond to that is,
is, is to wait for the insights report to come out, um,
because, um, there are a range of, uh, there is
more,
uh, there will be the regions, uh, that will be highlighted in that report.
And it will be clear as to also, uh, clear as to also the
sources of, um, data as well. Because as I said before, the
ranges of the, the data sources can range from counts, to lists,
to reports from the public. Um, and different forms of
data you can have more confidence about than others.
Um, so, uh, respectfully I'd rather, uh, I'd
rather, uh, I think the best, best response from, uh, I can give you
is that the insights report will be out soon.
Uh, that, uh, will have the latest information in
it. Um, and, um, yeah.
New question, Maureen?
Uh, thank you. Mine actually follows on-
Oh, great.
... a little bit from, um, some of the responses you gave just before
which was around how you forecast building and where you
forecast it to be.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but built into there is also the affordability aspect
in home ownership.
Mm.
So, so, um, and I asked the minister this, this
morning too, and he said to run it past you guys.
(laughs)
Okay.
Um, is, so when you're thinking about the planning,
uh, for investment into the long term, so we all know what the
immediate need is-
Mm.
... but very long term, what are you looking at in terms of
where the direction of travel may head?
Mm.
And, um, and at what point do
we reach saturation point?
So,
I think if you go back to the going for housing growth,
first of all, I don't think it's, uh, talk about there is,
uh, settings from Wellington around what the growth level should be
in, in particular places. What going for housing growth
is about, and what the, um, uh, the changes that are
proposed and the, uh, and the RM reforms are, are intended to do which is
to-... put the, put the, uh... Ensure that
local councils, local communities, um, can,
uh,
clear- clearly ascertain what their 30-year housing needs
are. Um, and, uh, that will be prescribed
in- in- in legislation, um, and then
backed up through secondary legislation as well.
Um, so as part of that process, uh, what you would
expect is that, um, local bodies,
uh, would be working to work out exactly what is the development
capacity needed in 30 years based on the best information that
they have, which will be a measure of obviously population growth,
uh, developable land and so on. Um, that
is the best way and if you... Uh, that is the- and ultimately
that's about unlocking land supply,
um, because I think it's a recognition from
advice from HUD and also from the minister that the best way we
can actually address affordability in this country is
actually to build more houses. Um, yes
that is never gonna... That's there are some people who are gonna still need
housing support and we've just talked about that, but ultimately for the
majority of New Zealanders who want more affordable housing-
(clears throat)
... it is getting more supply out there.
And so by- by- by providing for
mechanisms, uh, through the RM changes that councils have to
build, uh, have capacity for 30 years and supporting that through some
other changes to remove restrictive planning rules, to remove
silly things like, um, you know, what the size of your balcony can be or- or- or
the ability for councils to say your planter box has to be red or green.
Um, or the size of your cycle, um, uh,
park. Um, that is all about removing
restrictions, getting land available, getting land, getting houses
built as quickly as possible and that is h- getting supply, and that is how we
will get affordability improved in the country.
Can I ask something on that?
Yeah, sure.
What about tax?
Uh... Oh that's- that's
really, that's not a matter that we have, um, advised
ministers about. Um, I don't have a...
I don't, we don't have a very clear view on- on- on
tax. Um, that's a matter that's being worked through with any tax
matters we work through with Treasury and IRD.
I'll, I'll ask probably a couple of subs on this actually.
I was going to make it a separate question, but seeing as it's gone there anyway.
(laughs) Yeah.
Um, so you said in your initial comments that you're providing advice on, um,
these regional deals, uh, and around the country.
Mm-hmm.
And- and I've got a historic interest in one of the Otago Central Lakes one.
Right.
So I'm not going to ask you to- to- to delve into that too deeply.
Okay.
But what I'm interested in is sort of backward-looking, in terms of the data that
you have, and you mentioned earlier in response to a different question, that
there's some issues around data historically.
Um, (clears throat) and I know, I know in Queenstown Lakes, for example, that, um,
some data, uh, there's- these- these are a whole variety of different
data sources they're relied on. Statistics New Zealand, the, uh, district
councils have their own data sets.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and the Statistics Commission has their own data sets.
Uh, what we do know is that consistently for decades, um,
that the prediction about future growth has been significantly undercooked by
everyone. Um, and that's, I think, made quite real
challenges for our region. We're- we're one example of a number across the
country.
Mm-hmm.
Really, we are thinking because there hasn't been adequate data and adequate
projections before dashboarded to decision-makers, there hasn't been adequate
decision-making about what the future development is going to be.
Housing, schooling, health services-
(clears throat)
... roading, electricity generation, you know, supply, et cetera.
Yeah.
So I'm- I'm interested in what work you're
doing, or your department's doing, to really
critique those historic data sets, match them
to actual growth predictions, and sometimes declines, depends on which part of the
country, to- to try and make sure the dashboard, both with the new
organization and to other decision-makers, the best set of
predictions possible, you know, given- given
that...
Yeah. So, um,
............................ back.
Our
focus around data has been more around forward-looking.
Um, you know, how do we get better understanding going forward
around, you know, um,
uh,
yeah, um, you know, what might be the,
uh, well particularly at regional level, what might be the level of market
housing growth. And ultimately, as I said before-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, that is gonna be, uh, something that is gonna be required, uh, from local
councils as part of, uh, you know, communities as part of the- the RM
changes. Um, we rely a lot currently on
stats data.
Um, and, um,
and that gives us, has given us a sense in the past and we use that
obviously for, um, for the investment plan around, you know,
population levels and severe housing deprivation and so on.
Um,
we, the way we are dealing with that now though, too, is around the
investment plan is actually going out there to make sure we engage in a lot more in
depth with communities because we're not getting this...
You don't always get the full picture from- from- from stats data or just from
the data you- you gather yourselves as an entity.
Um,
what I'd, what I think is more important in terms of the way to answer your
question is, is what we do going forward.
So with going for, with going for housing growth,
um, and with the, um, Planning Act changes, um, and
reforms that will be, um, going through the
House, we need to be, we- we will want to be really clear about
are- are- are these changes, are these really key settings actually
making a tangible difference? And that is the focus of a lot of our work
now which is, okay, how do we measure the impact those
changes are gonna have?... um, how do we, how do we...
And a lot of that will still be required on st- uh, will s- still be dependent on
stats data, but that's the focus at the moment.
Um, do you want to say anything else, uh, Rachel, on that?
I think it's a good point, that we rely on statistics (indistinct)
Yeah.
They do go
Yup.
But can I
Can, can I, can I,
Yes.
... just sugg- um, encourage you to challenge it?
Uh, because if you look back at last 20 years of data for, say, Queensland
Lakes, when I... Just an example that I'm familiar with-
Mm-hmm.
... district. Uh, if you smooth it over 20 years, you're looking at
5.4% annual average growth.
Right.
Um, compounding.
Yeah.
Whereas that, if you look at the projections currently, it's a bit...
little over 2% growth. And that's what a lot of d- departments are making their
decisions based on.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and, you know, so if you look at history-
... and you look, you look at pro- predictions that were made at the time with
best information available-
Yeah.
... it doesn't match up.
Um, so can I, can I, um-
No, that's important.
... en- encou- encourage you to-
Yup. ... to stress test-
Yup.
... those assumptions-
... and to make sure those future predictions are, are good ones.
Yeah. But we're always looking to improve this. I think whether...
As I said before, um, around the investment plan, that is a, that is quite a,
that's a, a sort of big step forward in how we use data to be
much more informed now about where do we actually want to invest to
make the biggest impact.
And in that area, we have, um, since checked it with some of the communities as
well.
Right, right.
Add a bit of rigor to our data.
All right. Take your point.
Um, New Question Time, I
Hey, um, keen to talk about renting stuff.
Um,
so, the... You guys put out a
report in the last few weeks, I believe, and it talked about Healthy
Homes compliance. Um, obviously, it was pre-June, so
before the latest round of, um, compliance rules
came in on the 1st of July. Um, in it, in it,
the, the really striking statistics for, for me were that 59%
of rental properties do not have under-floor insulation, and that half of
renters say that their home is damp, or moldy, or difficult to heat in
winter. Um, what are some things
that MHUD could potentially look at, or the government could look at
to increase compliance for Healthy Homes?
Okay. I'll let Claire... Claire's in charge of the-
Oh, cool. Awesome.
Yeah.
Um, so the reason we did that report just before,
just before the 1 July deadline was to try and get a sense of how we were
tracking towards, um, landlords' compliance.
Mm-hmm.
So, um, what we did see was that 90%
of landlords were saying that... It is self-reported, but they are saying
that they were on track to comply or, or would have completed that by
1 July.
Mm-hmm.
So, that's a very positive sign. Um, and
the, the things were, their engagement was moving in the right
direction quite substantially since the report prior.
So, um, I think that's really positive.
Um, I don't have the under-floor insulation, uh, information
in front of me, but I know there are quite a few properties that
there's an exemption for. So, um, so for example, if
there's an apartment-
Yeah.
... then there's, then you're not required to have that.
And if there's a, a more modern, um, construction style
is that you've got a concrete pad. So, quite often, the...
If it's a new build, it might have insulation within the pad, but
then the resident themselves won't be able to check that it's
not... It's not kind of the same as if you've got a property that's
lifted up off the ground and you can pop your head under and check.
Um, so
around that, that there can be inter- some interpretation, um,
issues whe- when, if it's the tenant that's self-reporting.
Mm-hmm.
And there's a re- and there's a reasonable number of scenarios where that's
allowed. The key thing with Healthy Homes was, is
that we were requiring what, what the physical things are that can be
done with the building. So, that's making sure that the
property, um, you know, the property has the device there to heat the
room, that there is the ability to ventilate.
And so, that's providing the physical changes to the property that are
then, then the, the residents themselves will need to
work through what, to what level they can afford to heat.
And so, the electricity prices and what they're able to claim
to support around, um, any additional income supplement to cover that
cost, that all plays into whether there is dampness and
whether they can afford to heat the home.
But what we've, what we have done is provide the tools there for them to use
once they've worked through accessing other support so that they can afford to
heat their home. We've also got, um, a lot of,
uh, support around advice and guidance about they...
how they could choose to ventilate differently, how you can choose to use
your home differently up on the MBIE website, um, to support
people to think about when they might ventilate, for example, where they
might put furious things, uh, to try to minimize that.
And is it, is it too soon, since those new, um, rules came in on the
1st of July to kind of... Like, are you seeing any trends
around, um, tenants being a bit more confident to
enforce those standards, or are there...
Can you pick up any kind of early trends?
We are seeing that there are, um...
We're seeing positive signs around applications to the Tenancy
Tribunal, even like, in the... You know, we've been watching that in the years
before, um, before full compliance was
required, that people are taking cases.
Uh, and, and we're seeing that that is a theme as well
post, um, 1 July. But I think there's, there's also,
um, some market forces stuff going on there with...
In some markets like Wellington, there being, um, more properties on the
market, uh, tenants can also ch- choose that, the
ability they have with a bit more choice availability, a bit more
negotiability on the rent to actually choose when...
choose between properties that are compliant when they're, when they're making
those choices about where to move to next.
Mm-hmm.
So-
And, um, yeah, I'm moving into a new flat next week.
(laughs)
Okay.Uh, just also wanted to ask, have
you seen any trends from, um, no-cause
evictions were brought back in, and I think may...
came to force in the beginning of the year.
Have you seen any trends from that law change?
So we have been... Um, when I've been meeting with the Tenancy
Advocates Network and meeting with, um, property investors,
um, both at the Property Investors Conference and the Tenancy Advocates
Network, we've asked those questions about what, you know...
so when are landlords using those, um, no-cause
evictions, and what were the tenancy advocates,
um, hearing?
Mm-hmm.
They weren't... The last time I spoke to them, they weren't really seeing a trend
of increased use, and that different dynamic in the private
market, I think, is playing into that because landlords are...
They've obviously got to think about their continuity around their rental
income, and so they're thinking very carefully about when
they're gonna use that notice. That was the theme I was hearing, both from
landlords and also that... when I was
asking tenant advocates, like, "Do you have examples of it being
used? Is it being used in the right place?" That... They weren't...
There weren't examples at that time that they could give that they were
particularly concerned about. And I think it's the mark- the market being where it
is, um,
that, that is perhaps playing through with it as well, and that the tenants have
more choice, and the landlords are weighing up, um, when they're,
when they're using that.
Your question, Hill?
I wanna ask about the Carrington development-
Mm-hmm.
... which, um, the first thing is they've ****** to the,
um, buildings that have gone up. They're really, really lovely buildings.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Um, I understand that they were built with an
underwrite from the government. Um, is that within your
purview?
Yep, yep. So one, one of them, one of them-
One of them was.
... Ockham apartment was, yep.
Sounds like that mean it got built.
Is that a tool in the toolbox that you intend to use again given the
results are so good?
So, um,
so the RDU, uh, uh, tool...
Just step back. So that was, uh, that was launched October
last... October last year? Yeah.
(laughs)
That's right. Um, so it was intended to do, uh, uh,
two things. One was to help maintain a certain level of construction
activity in, in the country. Um, and we saw
the, uh, issues with that not happening after the, uh...
around the GFC time where we lost a lot of, uh, construction capacity.
But kept the pipeline going.
What's that? Kept the pipeline going.
The second was obviously to, uh, provide for housing supply.
Um, so, um, uh, we've had... We've got
about, I think, nine and maybe... if...
I may have signed another one yest- uh, I think it's an- another one yesterday.
Uh, underwrites that we've so far proc- uh, com- uh, a-
approved, contracted. Uh, the Ockham one being one of
them. Um, we've got a certain, uh, uh, of, uh,
envelope of money. Uh, that's basically a...
think of it as a risk contingency. And it's to how much would the government
be up for if all the, the underwrites were called in to a certain level.
Um, I think the program is... has been,
uh,
very well received by not just the...
you know, by the residential construction sector.
It's actually in a number of places. We've had... We've under... We've, um...
Deals have been done in Auckland, uh, Wellington,
uh, Hamilton, Queenstown. Um, in fact,
two recently in Queenstown. Um, so I think, uh, it is
definitely, um, meeting its objective.
Um,
in terms of, uh, the Carrington site, um,
if there are, uh, proposals,
um, for that site from
developers who want to access the RDU, then we will actively look at
them. Um, but what we do with each, each proposal is we've got to
weigh up a couple of things. One is, ultimately, um,
are we underwriting the sales risk, uh, which is
key. Um, and we have to w- and obviously what
kind of housing supply is occurring.
We have to factor that or balance that against what's the risk to the Crown.
So we always look at, for example, what is the demand in a place?
What is the other sales that are happening in a place? Is there...
As a member talked about, is there saturation and too many
properties on the market there, so does the Crown risk get elevated as a result?
So there's all those factors we weigh up.
But, um, uh, very... Uh, we've got a number in the
pipeline, a number of other, uh, deals, and, um,
processing those.
Can I ask you now, this is the non-****.
That site has a whole lot of different iwi
building, and when I tried to hold a public meeting-
Mm-hmm.
... at, I couldn't get anyone to talk to me about what was going on
there, and it's really hard for the community.
R- okay.
Um, when, um, we found out the other day that
Penman House was going, there was a lot of emotion around it.
To be fair, I'd been talking to MHUD, nobody had mentioned
it. What's going on with communication at MHUD?
'Cause it's a hard job you've got.
Mm-hmm. So we-
Are you telling communities enough to keep their
buy-in?
Diora.
Um, so the, the great news is that we are handing that
site officially back over to the three rōpū who, who, um,
are, uh... who's, uh, who will continue to develop that site.
So HUD has, has... We have almost completed our job
of, of acquiring the land. Uh, we're now in development agreements
with, um, the three rōpū bar one, one small agreement.
Um, but we're now in a great position where, um, we stand behind those
three rōpū, and they are now, um, in full control as they,
as they have been. They are the developers on that land.
So we can support further conversations, but we would, um...
but that would be-... with, with them.
That's pretty much the answer that I've got, a long time before now, that
it's nothing to do with MHUD, I've got to go to the iwi.
But you are the project managers for that site, and you're the
link to the community.
Ag- again, we would do everything with the ropu's-
Okay. ... um, s- standing beside them a- as the, as their partners on this, but they
are, they are the developers of that land.
I think to be, to be, just to be clear, our, our role
around, this is a for, this is a land for housing or Crown surplus land,
um, acquisition. Um, so the site
became surplus to requirements, we acquired it, acquired two
parcels over the last sort of
five, six, seven years.
2018.
Since 2018. Um, what we do is, and there's obviously
RFRs, we've worked with the three ropu, um,
and what, uh, Jessica's talking about is our
role is to, is to get the development agreements in
place, which is basically when are you gonna build, how much are you gonna build,
what yield are you gonna build, and by the way, how quickly can we then get the
capital returned back to the, the Crown?
And, but you get, you ropu, you carry the development
risk. And so when we're asked to sort of comment about what the
plan is or project managing, actually the ropu are the actual
ex, uh, are the, uh, are responsible for that, and they will be working with their
development partners as well, whether it be Ockham or Fletchers or anyone
else. Um, so we, we don't get
involved in then managing the ongoing
development. That is the ropu.
New question, Maureen.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I've got a question around transitional
housing.
Okay.
Um, so just, (clears throat) just wondering if you've got the figures there on
the vacancy rate-
Oh.
... of transitional housing. And, um, depending on what the answer
is, um, what is the plan going forward?
I can answer the occupancy rate, if that
helps. Oh, that's great. Yes.
Um, so at the moment it's just over 90% across the motu.
We have around, around 6,000 places around, um, the
country. So, um, through our, our, uh,
ongoing, uh, BAU utilization of,
of transitional housing, we're working with those providers to
see what tweaks we can do and working with them to ensure that
we have the, the least days possible between seeing one
client, uh, exit and another client come in.
Um, we're also looking at, um, with particular providers why
some, some particular clients might have stayed in there longer, but the average is
about 20 weeks-
Right.
... um, for, for each person to stay in transitional housing.
So yeah, we're, we're reasonably happy
with
where the full portfolio is. We would love to see, um,
further improvements, but they will be tweaks around the edges as
there's the, there, as it is a complex thing to be
able to match the right person, um, at the right time
with the right provider. Each provider has different cohorts that they look
after. Might be wahine, might be, um, uh, single
men. So it's not, it's not always, uh,
100% occupancy is, is, um-
Idealistic?
... not a-
No.
... not utopian too, and not, yeah, not a utopia we could ever expect out of that
particular-
Mm-hmm. Um, so just another question around, um-
Mm-hmm.
... the, the length of time between occupancies.
Yes, yeah.
So, so what is the type of thing that you do there and how long is-
Yeah.
... that usually vacant?
So at the moment it's around 14 calendar days in between one
client exiting and one client coming in.
The whole b- being transitional housing, we see as
much, almost as much
inflow as we do outflow. It's around about 4,000 each month coming in,
4,000 each month going, going out.
And we know that when they do exit transitional housing, um, around
60% do go into a, a form of long-term housing, be it social
housing or, or market. Um, and
another almost 20% or so, um, into another form
of housing to another provider or back to whānau or, or, or, or another
situation.
Right. Um, and the other question is, um, are you noticing a
significant drop in the number of children in transitional
housing given that they've got priority now, um, to come out of
emergency housing into more permanent housing?
Yeah, we, we have seen recently a, a, a change in cohort.
Um-
Wow.
Yes. (laughs)
Okay.
Um, yes, we have seen-
So it's working.
... a small drop in, in children. Thank you.
Supplementary, lieutenant. Um, when the minister, when, sorry, Minister
Potaka came in and was talking to us about, uh, youth transitional
housing, he mentioned a new contract signed with Matihuruhuru for
youth transitional.
Yeah. That was actually around our near-term actions where we're working with
Matihuruhuru on, on youth outreach.
Oh.
Yeah.
So yep-
Yeah. ... he, he was referring to that specific-
Mm-hmm. So-
... contract, but we do have transitional housing with them
............................
Oh, so that contract doesn't sit with you guys, the youth outreach?
The youth outreach does. It's part of our near-term actions to address
homelessness, um, part of the 10, 10 million that was, uh, announced by
ministers in September.
Oh, yeah.
So
... So they'll, they'll go out, talk to homeless young people-
Correct.
... and then ..............................
And connect them and connect them back in-
... to their
services. ... to the most appropriate, um-
Really nice. Um, Manaaki Rangatahi, uh, you, you'll probably be
aware of are just upstairs launching their, um, More Than a Home
report. Um, and I met with them last week because I knew I was gonna be in
here. And one of the big points they raised is their concern
that there's no youth transitional housing in Rotorua, Napier,
Taupō, Gisborne, Kaiāpuhe, Whangarei, and the North
Shore. Um,
I know it's not up to you how much money you get allocated for youth transitional
housing, but what do you understand around the need in those more
provincial areas, and
how can we put those providers in the best position to be
able to be doing the same things as Matihuruhuru?
We do have, um, we have Rangatahi-supported
housing at the moment, 50 places. That's, that's incredibly
intense provision, 24-hour, um,
uh, wraparound service. We've also got our, our specific
youth transitional housing with some of those providers.
We also, uh, within our, um, within our
broader 6,000 places, there are some youth places
in that we just haven't, uh, uh, called it
youth transitional housing. So indeed, yeah, that there is,
there is need. There's also other, um, other services and support
services that are available for, for-
I-
... the youth cohort as well.
I would say, just in addition, so we can look at the provision
of transitional housing to support, you know, young people in need.
But, um, you know, there's the 1,500
allocated in Budget '24 that'll obviously, you know, be providing
stable and secure housing, and that's social housing rather than
transitional. Um, if you look at the, uh, the investment
plan that was announced two weeks ago, it is going into areas where, quite
frankly, uh, the level of investment has not
been, um, suitable in the past. And if I take these,
places like, uh, Opotiki, um, uh, Whakatane,
Far North, you know, places where, quite frankly, um, there ha- there should, there
w- the need is the highest and we haven't made the investment, that will have a
disproportionate, um, impact obviously on, on, on youth, particularly in the
Far North there's high, high youth population.
Um, there is in those places too, I think it's important to remember,
there is still housing support products, whether it be through HUD or through
MSD. You know, if I think of, um, you know, Rent to Rez and Bond which
is there to help, you know, obviously including youth to, to stay in
their existing housing situation rather than fall into a homeless
situation as well.
Mm-hmm. And just-
New question, Kieran.
Oh, can I ask a quick sub on that?
We, we have to move on. There's a few people waiting.
Thank you. Um,
this morning when asked about
the 1,500 places funded in Budget '24, the minister
said, um, quote, "Yes, I'm advised that it is on
track." Uh, your aide memoire to the minister on
the 28th of August, uh, demonstrates that isn't
the case. The original timeframe, uh, was
1,500 to be delivered by June '27, and the
Annex A, Risk to 1,500 Delivery, it indicates that,
uh, we've got 337 in financial year
'25/'26 and another 147 before June,
uh, '27. That falls short. Do you have an update on these numbers?
This was at-
So-
... 31st of July.
So, um, yes, I do. So, uh, first point,
um,
we're very much focused on continuing to target delivery by, um, on
the, on the Budget '24 places, 1,500, by, um, end of
June 2027. Um, I think what
you were referring to, I think, um, there might be a
s- slight misinterpretation in terms of the information,
uh, or your, uh, the information, um, that you're
reading. Um,
so first of all, the briefing, uh, received,
uh, from officials for Minister Bishop several months ago and
reflected progress on Budget '24 at the end of July, it
didn't fire, it wasn't intended to provide a full picture of planned delivery.
And-
And with, with respect, that's why I'm asking for an update now.
So I'm giving you, yep.
Yeah, I'm getting there. Yep. So the table in Annex A that you
referred to show the expected numbers of places that will be delivered in
each year and quarter, and this is based on the Ministry's understanding as at
31 July. I think what has happened here
is, um, you've
identified, um,
because we've gone back and looked at this, the Q3 and Q4 delivery
numbers for '26/'27
has been attributed to the following financial year, in other words the
calendar year, instead of actually within the budget year.
So when we referred in our report to Q- Q3/Q4, we are referring up
until end of June '27, which is exactly the
target date. Um, so-
Okay. Well, I, I'm sorry to jump in but we've got six minutes and, and pending
questions so-
So can I-
Oh.
Even if that is the case, you've got 989 as the sum total there.
So that was, as I said, that was as of July.
Yeah, so where are we now?
As of July and as of, as the minister talked about, uh,
previously, as of 31 October 2025, of the
1,500, we have got 62 in proposed
or under evaluation, we've got
1,326 approved, um,
and they will be moving forward with construction, and we've got
115 delivered to date. And I would say
also that, um,
that, you know, we would expect that delivered number to be closer to
200, uh, by the end of this year as well.
So 1,358 have been allocated out of that
1,500?
So of the 1,500,
62 are still under evaluation,
1,326 have been approved-
16.
... and, and 115 have been delivered.
So 1,388. Okay, and how many of those, uh, have
been allocated to private developers on a
build-to-lease basis?
Well, so, so they, so the deals we do are always through community housing
providers. Uh, we, but through, uh, this
allocation, uh, working with community housing providers,
um,
we, uh, and I think the minister had, uh, acknowledged we're gonna be
a- more agnostic. We've said to community housing providers, "What matters here
is getting these places built
in the timeframe."... good value for money in the places that we have
prioritized. So, from that perspective, we said to the CHPs,
"You can go out there and you might wanna do build to own.
You might also want to do build to lease." But at the end of the day, community
housing providers don't build, developers build.
Now, at the end of the d- but going back, our deals are still
with the CHPs. The CHPs still have to
provide for that place while the funding goes through the CHPs, and they have to
manage the tenancy.
So, how many are in the lease arrangements rather than own?
I think I ... Have you got that, Sir?
Yeah. So, I don't, I don't have the precise numbers of lease, but,
uh, it is less than 50%, uh-
Okay.
... build to lease.
Would you mind following up with the committee w- once you can go back and find
those numbers, please?
Oh, there's that num- yeah, sure. Fine.
Thank you. It would be useful.
Uh, Nicholas Umpolo.
Um, my question has to do with the strategic
financial management of the ministry, um, and,
um, how you're doing with assessing
value for money, uh, and also, the
effectiveness of housing initiatives.
Um, do you, are you seeing progress in this?
Is it in informing your long-term planning?
Yeah.
Um, do you need additional information or capability to
get there?
So, um,
I'm
really impressed with the work we've done around value for money, um, and
I've seen the, see the benefits of that come through in Budget '24 and Budget
'25. And we're continuing to, everything we do, we're continuing to look from a
value for money lens because ultimately, there's a lot of money, as I said before
in my introduction, you know, eight, eight, 8 billion go per annum coming through
HUD. We ... That's a lot of money, a lot of taxpayers' money, and we want to make
sure it's having an impact. And particularly an impact for those who have the
highest housing need across the country.
So, in Budget '24, just as a, a case in point,
uh, value for money, we, we, um, assessed a number of
programs. Some weren't having the impact we wanted.
Some were due to finish anyway, so there wasn't additional funding ongoing for
them. But in Budget '24, we were able to fi- uh, to, uh, find
savings, um, in the vicinity of net
1.5 billion, but through that process, we
were able to, uh, fund additional 1,500 community housing,
uh, social housing places. In Budget '25, I think our
net sa- we found savings of close to 500
million, and from that they, we were able to fund, uh, significant,
some significant cost pressures, including $100 million cost
pressure over the forecast period for, um, for housing
first places that were already in existence, um, as well
as, uh, finding 41 million plus 250 million capital over 10 years
to fund the flexible fund, which is an additional
675 to 770
places.
That's very good.
I'm gonna take the opportunity to probably ask my last question too.
Okay. (laughs)
Um, just that, uh, look, last, last time you were in front of the committee, we
talked a little bit about, um, your leadership role in the overall housing and
urban deve- development space.
Yeah.
And, uh, how you work with local government around the country, um,
and there's, um, and there's, there's also the other piece which is, uh, you know,
for example, working with the Ministry of Education around future schooling needs-
Mm-hmm.
... and how that impacts on housing requirements and vice versa.
Uh, transport, um, you know, our transport sector and
NZTA, um, and, uh, regional councils in terms of delivery of public
transport. Uh, and, you know, then you have, say, um,
Transpower and different, you know,
in terms of their delivery of the energy needed-
Mm-hmm.
... et cetera, so, um, what levers do you have
in this overall super leadership role?
And how have they been working in the year in
review?
So, um,
so we have a big focus on, on what you would call sort of urban growth,
uh, we call it Urban Growth Partnerships.
Um, which is basically in some of our areas like Waikato, Auckland,
um, Canterbury, your area, um,
Wellington region, going okay, working with local councils, regional councils, you
know, what is, what, what are development areas?
You know, what are, where are we gonna build?
Um, so if you ca- take the points in Auckland, City Rail and Drury,
um, and City, uh, uh, and City
Rail, uh, we've been working closely with Transport to go,
okay, um, how do we make sure the sites around those,
those stations are actually going to be developed?
Um, you get value and you get throughput through those stations the
more people you have living around them, and that's the overseas, uh,
experience and evidence. Um, so we're working to go with, with,
um, Transport and also the Council to how do we unlock that land?
Some of our land is, uh, I think one or two sites is kaitunga aura
around one of the stations, but it's also, how do we actively work with
the Council to make sure that they can get those sites developed, and they'll be
working with private developers.
So, there's, uh, there's, uh, pretty much a, a nudging aspect coming from
us to say, "Are you thinking about this, this how do we get the most benefits out
of that, um, transport investment?" Um, in Drury,
um,
we are part of a developer group
that is, uh, involves also other, um,
other agencies like Health, like Education, like NZTA.
And what we're focused on there is, once again, okay, where are we gonna develop in
Drury, over what timeframe, and what infrastructure needs to be provided?
So, we play very much in a lot of the exam- two examples I've used, a coordination
role. Because a lot of the time around infrastructure, funding and financing,
getting that right, is absolutely critical.
It's also getting your, getting that aligned and coordinated.
So, if you're gonna go and build a great big motorway in Tauranga
and to Rico West, are you thinking at the same time around the land
enablement and housing supply and how that's gonna come on?
Because then ultimately, you can invest in, in transport and
new corridors, but actually, how do you get people to live along them and use
them as well? And that's where we are very much focused.
A lot of the time, as I said, our work is around, okay, have you
thought about the housing supply? Have you thought about the land use?
Have you thought about the intensification opportunities?
Um, because the benefits accrue, additional benefits accrue, just
from, for example, providing a road.
Excellent. I'd, I'd like to have a lot more questions, but I think we have to
..............................
Thank you.
Thank you very much-
No, thank you.
... for coming before the committee and-
Thanks.
... thanks for the work that you're doing.
Thank you.
Okay. Cheers.
Ta.
Okay.